Overview
In this video, you'll learn how to use the numpy library in Python. Now, if you're interested at all in data science, AI, machine learning,
or scientific computing, then numpy is a must learn. And fortunately, in just a short video like this, I can teach you all of the fundamentals
that will get you quite far. So with that said, let's get on to the computer and let me teach you numpy in Python.
Setup & Install
So on my screen I have the numpy website open. Now almost everything you'll see in this video comes straight from the documentation.
I've just condensed it and put it into a nicer format to learn. So if you want to reference anything, feel free to go here numpy.org.
Now with that said, I'm going to go into my code editor here. For this video I'm using cursor, but you can use anything you like.
PyCharm vs code doesn't matter. And the first thing we need to do if we want to start working with numpy is we need to install it.
So go ahead and open up your terminal and simply type the command pip install numpy.
And that's going to install that directly into your Python installation. And then allow you to import it and start using it inside of your project.
So if you're on windows you can simply run this command. If you're on Mac or Linux you can run the pip three command.
Now once you have NumPy installed, you'll be able to use it by importing it just like this.
Now what you see me working inside of right now is something called a Jupyter notebook. And I'm going to recommend that you follow along in this video
using a Jupyter notebook, because it's the most common when dealing with libraries like numpy and doing things like scientific computing.
Now, if you're wondering how to open a Jupyter notebook, it's quite simple. If you're working inside a VSCode cursor or any VSCode forks or something like windsurf,
you can hit on your keyboard, Ctrl, shift P, or Command Shift P. If you're on Mac, you can type Jupyter, so J up and then it should start showing the autocomplete here.
And you can go create new Jupyter Notebook, the one I have selected right here. From here it should open up a new notebook which ends in this dot ipynb extension.
From here, you're able to directly write markdown code. So something like Hello World! Or you can write a code cell where you can directly import and run code.
So for example, if I do something like import numpy then I can actually just run that cell. And we'll see I select a kernel.
So let's select this one right here. They will have an output block if anything is outputted directly below that. And we can create other code blocks or markdown blocks throughout the file.
So I've already created a notebook that has all of the code that I'm going to be showing you in this video, but I recommend you make your own notebook again and again.
Dot Ipynb and you mess around and kind of play with some of the examples that I'm showing you in this video.
And last thing, if you want the exact notebook that you see on screen to follow along with, you can download it from the link in the description.
Simply sign up for my email list and I'll give it to you for free. So with all that said, let's start with an introduction to numpy.
What is NumPy
Well, numpy stands for Numerical Python and it provides support for large multi-dimensional arrays and matrices.
It includes a collection of a ton of mathematical functions to operate on these arrays, and it's essential for any type of data science,
machine learning, and scientific computing task in Python. NumPy itself is extremely efficient.
The underlying operations are written in C and C plus plus, and it's used in all of the major frameworks that you've probably seen in Python before.
Think something like TensorFlow or PyTorch. All of these use numpy behind the scenes, so it's essential that you understand how numpy works.
So when you're working with those types of operations or frameworks, you know what's actually going on and the type of data you're working with.
And again, just to stress numpy, typically deals with large arrays. So you're going to see in this video that pretty much everything we do has to do with numbers and arrays okay.
So if you want to get started with numpy, the first thing you need to do is import it. So you import numpy as NP.
Now this is just the convention you're almost always going to see anytime numpy is used directly that it's imported with the alias.
And now let's just quickly go over why you would use numpy. I already talked about some of the reasons,
and I'm going to give you a few practical examples in some of these code cells right here. So like I said, numpy arrays are more efficient than Python lists for numerical operations.
Why Use NumPy?
In fact, they're significantly more efficient. And they make the code run significantly faster. So you can see that I have a Python list right here where I have some elements like one,
two, three, four, five. Then I have the exact same thing represented as a numpy array.
So this is your first introduction to how to create a numpy array. I can take a Python list and I can wrap NP dot array around that.
This now represents the data differently in my computer's memory. And it uses numpy which again is written in C and C plus plus as opposed to pure python.
So now when I run this cell here, we can just go through the output of some of the examples here. So when we print the Python list looks like this.
Right 12345. When we print the numpy array it looks very similar. Just notice that we don't get the commas here.
So we get 12345. Then we can look at the type of these different objects. And you'll notice that when we look at the type of the Python list it is class list.
Whereas when we look at the type of the numpy array it is numpy dot ndarray. Now ndarray stands for n dimensional array
just meaning this can be in any number of dimensions which we're going to get into later. Then I just do a quick operation where I add ten to all of the values inside of the list.
Now, in order to do that with a Python list, notice that I actually need to use a for loop or some kind of mapping operation.
So I have x plus ten for x in python list. So I get all of the elements and add ten to them. Whereas when I do it with numpy I'm actually able to perform a vectorized operation,
which means that I can directly add ten to all of the elements inside of this list without actually having to loop over them.
Now again, this has to do with how numpy represents the data and the way that it's actually written. It's a lot more efficient.
And I'm going to show you a quick time comparison right now, so you can see how much faster working with a numpy array actually is.
So I have a quick example on my screen here where what I do is create two lists, one which is a Python list which has 1 million elements, and another which is a numpy array.
So same thing, but just represent as a numpy array, again with a million elements. Now what I'm going to do here is perform a quick performance analysis where I see
how long it takes to add one to all of the elements inside of the normal Python list, versus how long it takes if we use a numpy array.
So notice in this example I'm using a for loop right? And in this example I'm just using the scalar addition.
We'll talk about this later where I'm adding one directly to the numpy array. So I'm just going to run the code here.
And I just want you to see that what happens is numpy is 35.6 times faster.
Or with the Python list it took 0.035 seconds. And with the numpy array it took 0.001 seconds significantly faster.
And this is just for a million elements. So hopefully at this point you have a decent understanding of why you would use numpy
and what it is. And we're going to get into all of the syntax and features of numpy. After a quick word from today's sponsor boot.dev.
It's an online learning platform designed specifically for back in development, and it approaches learning in a way that's far more interactive than the usual video based courses.
Rather than having you sit through hours of lectures. Boot.dev puts you straight into hands on coding.
You'll work directly in your browser, building real projects while learning backend fundamentals like APIs, databases and server side logic using Python and Go.
Now what makes it stand out is the way that it borrows from game design. You'll progress through levels, unlock new content, and keep your momentum up as you go.
The platform is filled with exercises and practical challenges, so you'll end up writing a lot of code, which is exactly what helps you improve.
Now, all of the core content is free to access, and if you decide to commit to the annual plan, you can use the code tech with Tim to get 25% off your first year.
I've been going through it myself lately, and honestly, it's surprisingly addictive thanks to boot. Dev. Now let's get back into it.
Creating NumPy Arrays
So let's get back into it, and let's start talking about creating numpy arrays again. While we're working with numpy,
we're almost always using some form of arrays or lists, whatever you want to refer to them as. Now here I just have a block of code that shows you
a ton of different ways that you can make numpy arrays. Oftentimes when you're working in frameworks, you'll already have
a numpy array provided to you, or it'll be used behind the scenes. But if you want to make one by yourself here many of the different ways that you can do that.
So the first way is from a Python list, right? We can simply just create array where we say NP dot array.
And then we put the elements inside of a Python list that we want to be in the array. Now it's important to note that when you create a numpy array,
all of the elements need to be the same. So unlike in Python where I could do like true or hello or something like that, that doesn't work
in numpy, they all need to be the same type, so either floats or ints. Next we can use NP dot arange.
Now this is similar to using range in Python where what we can do is create a range of values.
So in this case we're starting at zero stopping at but not including ten and stepping by two.
So we're going to get an array that looks like 02468. Next we have NP dot linspace.
And this is going to give us evenly spaced numbers. So in this case we can have a start a stop. And then the number of elements that we want.
I'll show you what that looks like in a second. But it would be 00.20.4 etc.. Next we can just create a full array of zeros.
In this case, it's going to give us a one dimensional array with five zeros inside of it. We also could create array of ones.
So it says NP dot ones right. And then we have five ones inside of there. Continuing we can do NP dot full.
Now when we do NP dot full that's going to populate this number of elements with this value.
So we're going to have five elements that are all sevens. We can have an identity matrix I'll show you what that looks like in one second.
We also could have a random array. So we're just doing random values or five random values. Or we could do random integers in some kind of range.
So if I run this cell here you'll see what all of these values look like. Again you can play with this on your own as well. And you see 123450246. This one I got wrong.
Sorry because it only went up to four not five. So 00.25, etc. we have full the identity matrix which looks like this.
Random values random integers. You get the idea. So that's how you can create numpy arrays.
NumPy Data Types
Now like I was saying, when you use numpy arrays, all of the values inside of these arrays need to be the same type, and that's referred to as the dtype or the data type of a numpy array.
Just have a look at this code example right here. I'm actually just going to run this so we can refer to some of the values. So if we scroll down here you'll see the first array right.
It's just a bunch of whole numbers. So 123 integers in Python. And you'll see that the type of this array when I prints it out is int 32.
And to access the type of a numpy array you can use this dot dtype value. Then you'll notice that I had some floats.
So 1.02.03.0. And when I print out the type of this numpy array it's float 64.
And then if we have mix types. So if we mix integers and floats together which is allowed it's going to give us float 64.
The reason why this is allowed is because one can be represented as a float. However, 2.5 could not be represented as an int,
so we need to promote the type to be a float, which does take up more space in our computer. To be able to represent both of the types that we have inside of here.
So just keep that in mind. You're always going to have one type. And if you're going to have these mixed integers and floats, it's always going to be a float
array because that's what's needed to represent those values. Now continuing from here, if you wanted to specify the type that you're going to use manually,
you can do that. For example, you can use a float 32, which is going to use 32 bits as opposed to 64 bits by default.
You also could specify that this is an int, for example, right up to you. You also can change the type of a numpy array.
So if you want to represent array as a different type, you can say the array dot as type and then specify the type directly from numpy that you want to convert it into.
When you do that, it's going to give you a new numpy array. With that new type okay. And then you can see the amount of memory that's used for these different types
four bytes and then eight bytes. Right. So if you want to have lower amount of memory you want to use in 32
or float 32, if that doesn't mean anything to you, don't worry. Not super important right now. Okay. So let's continue and talk about multidimensional arrays, which is where numpy
Multi-Dimensional Arrays
becomes really powerful but also a little bit confusing. So when we talk about dimensions, we're talking about
essentially the number of nested arrays that are inside of one another. So let me go into this cell here.
If we talk about a one dimensional array, it's just something like this one that you've seen before, just like a standard Python list.
12345 we have one dimension because the array or the list is flat.
If we talk about two dimensional arrays, that's where we have something like a matrix or rows and columns.
So notice here we have arrays inside of this array. Now numpy is capable of representing multi-dimensional arrays
typically two three 4 or 5 multiple dimensions. Right. And that's when you have multiple lists arrays nested inside of one another.
So I just want to show you a few examples here. If we're looking at a 2D matrix here and we print it out.
So let's actually just run this right here. You can see it looks something like this one printed with numpy were then able to have a look
at some of the properties of this matrix or of this numpy array. So I can look at the shape for example.
This is a very important thing to understand in numpy. And when I look at the shape it gives me three three.
Now the way that the shape works is that the number of elements inside of this tuple here is the number of dimensions that is inside of my array.
So in this case we have two dimensions because we have a matrix or a 2D array. The first dimension which is the number of rows is three.
So we have three rows. And then we have three columns or three elements inside of every row.
That's how the shape works. We start with the outermost dimension and then move inwards and give the stats
or essentially the number of elements in each dimension. Then if we want to look at the number of dimensions, we can look at n dim number of dimensions,
which is two. We can look at the total size which is the total number of elements.
In this case we have nine. And then we can look at the data type which in this case defaults to into 32.
Now let's have a look here at an example of a 3D array. Okay. So we can print the 3D array out.
And it looks something like this right. Where imagine we kind of have like pages of 2D arrays.
So we have this first page which is this one, the second page which is this one. And then within there we have rows and we have columns and notice
the shape of this is 2 to 2 because we have two pages. We have two rows within each page and then two columns within each row.
Now if we were to change that. So let's just make this a little bit different. For example 6035 okay.
Like so. And let's rerun this. So rerun the. So you can see now the shape is 223.
Because again two pages two rows and then three values inside of each row.
That's how the shape works. Make sure you understand that because that's pretty important. And then lastly I'll just show you that if you want to create your own multidimensional rays,
you can do that by specifying the shape. When you're using some of those methods that I showed you above.
So when we did NP dot zeros before, notice that before I just did like three. Right. That just means add three elements right and make a one dimensional array.
However, if I want to make a multi-dimensional array, I just specified the shape of the array. In this case, I want a two dimensional array which has three rows and four columns.
I specify that and then again, if I run the cell, you can see it will create that for us. So we have three rows and four columns.
And then same thing we can create one like this I just didn't print it out. So let's print okay.
Once 3D and then run this. And you can see now it looks like this. It's just kind of not showing all of it
because it's giving us a preview when it prints out and you see the shape is two, three, four. And just as a quick cheat sheet here, I just put a cell in this Jupyter notebook
Array Attributes
that shows you all of the different major properties that you want to know about numpy arrays. Right? So the shape, the size, the number of dimensions, the data type.
You can also look at the item size. So the size of each element you can look at the number of bytes that's used by this array.
And then if you're familiar with a transposition of an array you can use dot t. And this will transpose the array automatically for you.
So you can use it you know, as is needed when you do kind of those linear algebra type operations. Again, if you're not familiar with the transposition of an array,
don't worry, it's probably not important for you. Okay. So let's move next to indexing and slicing.
Indexing & Slicing
Now, just like standard Python lists, you can access all of the elements inside of NumPy arrays by using a standard index or a Python slice.
However, it gets a little bit more complex with numpy arrays because you're working with multiple dimensions and you can create kind of multi-dimensional slices.
So let's have a look at this simple numpy array up here. This is a one dimensional array okay. So when we do 1D indexing this is the exact same as a standard Python list.
So if I want to access the first element array at index zero I want to access the last element I can use a negative index negative one I want to do a slice where I get all of the elements
between a range. I can do that. I want to get every other element. I can do that using a standard Python slice which works like start stop step.
When you don't have an element, it means start at the beginning or stop at the end based on what kind of position you're in in this slice.
Now, when you get into 2D indexing, it gets a little bit more complicated. So let's run this so we can see the results. Notice now I have my numpy array two dimensions right rows and columns.
I can print it out. And if I want to access the element at row one column one, rather than having two sets of indices like I would with a standard Python list,
I'm using them inside of one set of square brackets. So I'm saying matrix and then one comma two I'm referencing.
I want to look in row one. Column two. Again I'm separating those values with commas. So every comma I put here is referencing a dimension that I want to access.
So dimension one I want to access index one. Dimension two I want to access index two.
Now if we wanted to get all of the columns in the first row, for example, what we can do is do matrix zero comma.
And then we can put a code when we put the colon. This is equivalent to having a slice where we're essentially saying
we want to start at the very beginning and then end at the very end. So we're just putting, what is it, a colon here without putting anything on the left or right side?
Now let's say I want to access the second column. I can say okay matrix same thing. Colon.
So reference everything and then just get the second column right. So I'm putting a one like that.
And then if I wanted to get a submatrix for example. So the first two rows and the first two columns, then I would say okay
I want to start at zero and go to two and then start at zero and go to two. And if we have a look here you can see this is my 2D array.
The element at row one column two is six. So this one right here the first row 123.
The second column is 258. And then the submatrix you can see it's kind of this small square
right here 1245 okay cool. So that's a little bit complicated. It can be a bit confusing.
So I recommend playing around with it, trying it with some 2D and 3D matrixes. And when you get into the 3D 45 D matrices, the exact same thing applies is what you're seeing here.
We just have more dimensions. So if we have another dimension here, right. This just means I now add another row or another kind of comma
separated value inside of my index when I'm trying to access the values. And this is where numpy can get confusing.
It's very difficult to visualize anything beyond three dimensions. So when you start getting into four dimensions, five dimensions, six dimensions, it's easier
just to go back to the fundamentals, understand how it works with 2 or 3 dimensions, and then apply that at a higher dimension value rather than you trying to visualize it.
Because again, it's very difficult to visualize data that's organized more than three dimensional,
because just as humans work, we only look in two, three and one dimension. Okay. So let's continue here.
Now we have boolean indexing as I says here. Pretty powerful feature. So I have just a 1D array here.
And I'll show you that what I can actually do is have kind of this conditional expression inside of my index where it's only going to grab for me values
that specifier that are true essentially in this expression. So I said, okay, all the elements greater than five.
So I have array and I did array greater than five. When I do that it's going to go through here. And it's going to apply this boolean and only give me the elements greater than five.
So if we have a look down here you can see 6789 ten. Same thing with the even numbers I can do array mod two equal to zero.
And then it's only giving me those values. Now you can use these when you're dealing with more than one dimensions as well.
But again you now need to have multiple values in your index. So now let's continue to the next section which is array operations.
Array Operations
So of course when you're working with numpy you can perform all kinds of operations with numpy arrays.
And again these operations that you perform are significantly more efficient and also just easier to write out.
And perform than if you were dealing with a standard Python list. So you can see that I have two numpy arrays here, a and b.
Now if I print these out. And so let's actually just run them, you can see what they look like right here. Now we can perform multiple types of operations.
We have element wise operations which means each element is going to be applied to the other element.
So like one is going to match with five two is going to match with six, three is going to match with seven. It's going to go element by element.
We also have scalar operations. When we perform a scalar operation, this means that we're going to take some individual value
and add that to all of the values inside of the array. So when I add ten, that's adding ten to every individual element inside of the array.
Same thing when I multiply by two, multiplying every element by two. When I do power of three same thing, every element by three.
And then we have comparison operators. I'll show you what those look like in one second okay.
So we have the ability to perform addition. So if I want to add, you know array a to array B I can do that by adding
all of the individual elements. Same thing with subtraction multiplication right. This is not a dot product if you're familiar with that.
So it's different. We have division A divided by B. We can raise A to the power of two.
Although I think I already did that down here. So let's delete that one. For right now we can do the square root for example. So NP dot square root.
And let's run this. And you can see here are some of the examples right. So when we add a plus b we take the element one.
Add it to five we get six. Take two six get it take three plus seven get ten.
Take four plus eight get 12. Subtraction. Same thing right? Multiplication. You get the idea. You can look at those examples.
Now here if we add the values you can see a plus ten 1112, 13, 14.
Right eight times two, 2468. You get the idea. And then comparison operators. Here's where it looks a little bit interesting and might be surprising to you
when we perform a comparison like this, it will perform it on every single element. So it gives us a new array
that contains the boolean, which represents whether or not this expression was true. So a greater than two.
Well, is that true for these elements? Yes it is, but it's false for these ones. And you get the idea. And you can perform kind of some advanced arithmetic and comparisons using this type of syntax.
So let's continue and talk about array manipulation specifically reshaping and resizing arrays.
Array Manipulation
Now it's very common that when you're dealing with numpy arrays you need to reshape them. Or change kind of their format.
For example, imagine you have a two dimensional array and you need to flatten that into a one dimensional array.
Happens all the time. And I'm going to show you some examples of how you can do this okay. So I've just created a 1D array here. Right.
We can run this. And if we have a look this is what the 1D array looks like. Now I might want to convert this 1D array into something of a size of three four.
Right. Create a matrix that has the same values as this. Now in order to do that, what I can do is use this reshape method.
Now, when I reshape the method, I need to ensure that the new size matches the number of elements that I have in the original right.
So in this case, because I have three rows of four elements, I have a total of 12, which matches the number of elements in this array.
So that's totally fine. I can reshape this and it works properly. If I scroll down here, you'll see that it's now reshaped this.
And I now have three rows with four elements each. However, if I added an additional element so I made this like 13 for example.
So let's save that and rerun. And you'll see the error here. Cannot reshape race of size 13 into shape three four okay.
So the shape needs to match the number of elements. If you're going to do this resizing let's change that back.
And now it should be good okay. Now same thing. We can do a flatten. So like I said if we have something that's like a two dimensional array or three
dimensional array, we can flatten that into a one dimensional array. To do that you simply just write flatten.
And now if we run this, you'll see that we took this and we flattened it back into the original array.
Now let's continue. We also have the ability to reshape using an automatic calculation.
So sometimes you don't know the exact shape or the exact size that you want to change the array into.
And if that's the case you can use this negative one which means calculate automatically. So what I'm saying here is I want to reshape my original array.
So this one right here. And I want to reshape it into something that has two dimensions. Because I'm specifying two values here.
The first dimension I know I want to have two rows, but I don't know the number of columns that I want to have.
So I'm going to put a negative one here where it will now automatically calculate how many values I need in the columns for it to reshape that for me automatically.
So now what it will do is will auto reshape with two rows and then automatically find the number of columns.
So again when I do that you can see that it's reshaped this. And we now have six elements in each column because that's what's required to create this shape.
Now if we want to do this for more than one dimension, I could do for example, maybe two two negative one.
This works as well. So I can run this and you'll see that now we've got three elements
in every single row because that was what was required with the automatic calculation. Okay.
So we had two pages essentially two rows and then three columns. Okay. Let's go back and just change that back to what we originally had.
Then we have a transpose. So like I was saying you can transpose a matrix. If you transpose a matrix you're essentially just writing it
not in reverse, but where every single row is where every single column used to be.
So you're kind of just flipping the rows and the columns. So if we look at the transposition, you can see this is the original matrix.
And then if we transpose it we now have kind of a longer matrix where all of our columns are now our rows.
Right. And all of our rows are now our columns. And then we have concatenation. So if you want to essentially add multiple matrixes together you can do that.
But you need to specify how you're going to add them. So you can see here that we have two two dimensional matrices right now.
If that's the case if I want to add them or concatenate them, I can vertically stack them,
I can horizontally stack them or I can concatenate them and use a specific axis.
Now when I specify an axis, this is the same thing as me using a vertical stack or a horizontal stack.
I'm just doing it more manually by saying what axis I want to combine these matrices on, and we're going to talk about axis ease in one second.
So it makes a little bit more sense okay. So with the array concatenation you can see we have array a array b. When we do the vertical concatenation and we stack them along the vertical axis.
You can see we have 123 4 or 5 678. So we just took these added them to the end there.
Whereas when we do a horizontal concatenation it adds it to the rows. So you can see that this row got added to this one.
And then this row got added to this one okay. Now let's move on to understanding dimensions and axis.
Because this is an important concept and something that's commonly misunderstood in numpy okay. So when we talk about numpy arrays you're going to hear dimension axis and shape.
Dimensions and Axis
Very commonly I just want to go over these again and show you a few examples. So you really kind of know how to wrap your head around them
because that's in my opinion, the most confusing part about working with these types of data structures.
Now the dimensions is the number of axes. Okay. Essentially the number of kind of nested arrays inside of one of another.
So if we have one dimension right, we have one axis, we have two dimensions. We have two axis.
Now a two axis most people can understand. Right. Because it's just a two dimensional array. Kind of looks like a grid where you have a row and a column.
When we start going beyond three, as I mentioned, it's very hard to visualize, but you still can have that type of data represented in numpy.
It's very common to see that type of data, but it's just hard for us to wrap our head around. Now when we talk about the axis specifically,
this is the dimension along which an operation is performed. So if I'm working in a two dimensional array, for example, then I have two axes right
axis zero is the row, axis, one is the columns. And then of course we have the shape.
So this is the size of each dimension like we talked about before. We're going to have multiple values for the shape.
The number of values we have actually specifies the number of dimensions or the number of axes. And in this case if we had a size of three four, that would be three rows four columns.
Now let's skip this first cell and just move into this second one where I'm going to show you a few examples of performing operations
and specifying the axis that you want to perform these operations on. So let's say that I want to get a sum of a matrix.
Well, in order for me to get that sum, I need to specify what axis I want to perform the sum on or no axis at all, where it's going to sum all of the values.
So when I specify axis zero, this means that I want to collapse all of the rows and essentially operate down the columns.
So I want to get one value per column, and I want to get three sums or multiple sums
based on the number of values that are inside of my matrix, or the number of rows that I have.
So when I say, okay, I want to do NP dot sum matrix and an axis zero effectively, what I'm saying is I want to get the sum of all of the values in the columns.
When I say axis zero, what I'm really saying is I want to sum all of the columns.
So I'm going to run the cell so you can see what I mean in a second. But the same thing applies down here when I specify axis one.
So let's run this and have a look. So I have my matrix right three rows three columns shape three three.
Then when I take the sum and I specify axis zero, this is the sum. This is what it gave me.
It gave me a new array that now has a shape of three. That's it. The shape is just three because it's a one dimensional array.
Now the values here are equivalent to the sums of all of the columns in my matrix.
Now we can reference that because you can see that it's added one, four and seven which gave me 12.
It added two, five and eight which gave me 15, added three, six and nine, which gave me 18.
And just a quick example, you can see if we're getting the column zero sum right, one plus four plus seven as I showed you, which equals 12 which is in index zero.
If we're getting the column one sum 258 which is 15, which then is in index one.
Now if I reference axis one, this is going across the columns or giving me each row sum.
So you can see I have one two, three which is six I have 4 or 5, six which is 15, I have seven, eight, nine which is 24.
So when I reference axis zero that's specifying the rows, right. So it's kind of the outermost dimension that I'm looking at when I specify axis
one that's talking about the columns or the values inside of the row. So it gave me the sum of each row.
I know that's a little bit confusing, but I just want to show you quick example there. Now let's have a look at a quick example of a three dimensional array.
So we've created an array right. And you can see that we kind of have like page one page two.
And this is the way to think about it. And then within each page we have rows and we have columns. So as I said you know think two pages each with a two by three matrix on.
So let's just print this out. Let's start looking at some of the results. You can see the shape of this is 223.
So a depth of 2 or 2 pages two rows and three columns. So this time when I reference axis zero
this is referencing each individual page because it's the outermost dimension that you're looking at first.
When you look at axis at index zero. So let's have a look. What happens when I do the sum now on axis zero in a three dimensional array.
So let's scroll down here. This is the one that we're looking at. Now notice that the shape that I get is two three.
So I'm getting a shape that has one dimension less than the dimension of the array that I'm applying this operation on.
And what I've done is I've gone this kind of weird matrix where this eight actually corresponds to the sum of one and seven.
So I'm looking at elements that are in the same position on a different page, effectively, and adding them together.
When I look at ten, that's eight plus two. When I look at 12, that's three plus nine.
When I look at 14, that's ten, sorry, ten plus four. Okay. So you get the idea.
That's how it's being added together because I'm doing this on axis zero. Then if we look at axis one we're now going down the rows.
So I'm now going into each page right. So I'm looking at each page and I'm going down the rows like I did before.
So this five is one plus four. This seven is two. So two plus five.
This nine is three plus 617 seven plus ten. And then if I go across the columns same thing.
It's just happening in the pages right this time. So what's happening with my six is I've added one plus two plus three.
What happens with my 15 is I've added four plus five plus six with my 24, seven plus eight plus nine.
And you get the idea. So a little bit confusing. But that's how the axes work when you're performing operations.
Statistical Operations
So let's continue and have a look at some statistical operations in numpy. I'm not going to go over all of them, but I just wanted to show you kind of a list
of some different things that you can do here. So you can get statistics like the sum, the mean, the median, right.
The standard deviation, variable deviation, min, max argument, argmax, all of that kind of stuff.
And then you can even do this with 2D arrays as well. The same thing is before you can perform these exact same operations.
But this time you specify the axis that you want to perform them on. And that's kind of a cool thing about numpy is that no matter how many dimensions you have,
you can always perform these operations and you just get a different sized result, right, based on the axis that you're performing them along.
Which is why I showed you that example previously. Okay. Now let's have a look at some linear algebra operations, because numpy is also very good at working with linear algebra.
Linear Algebra
In fact it's designed for that like I was showing before. We can have two matrices. We can multiply those together element wise, right.
With just an a times B. But we can also perform a dot product of various vectors.
So if you want to have a dot products you can do NP, dot dot. And that's going to give you a scalar value.
So I'll show you this right now. And you can see if we do the dot products we get 32.
I'm not going to explain dot product right now, but if you've taken a linear algebra course then you're familiar with what that is.
Okay. Now same thing with matrix properties. So for example you can look at the determinant of a matrix. You can look at the inverse of a matrix.
You can transpose it. And there's some other more advanced stuff here that I don't even really understand that. Well like these eigenvectors, which has been way too long since I've done that.
You can do this inside of numpy. I just wanted to show you that those operations exist. Right. And you can see kind of the results right here.
All right. So continuing let's have a look at a few useful array methods. Again just a quick list so that you're familiar with some of this stuff that you can do here okay.
Useful Array Methods
So sorting if you want to create a sorted copy of an array you can use NP dot sort
if you want to sort it in place you can do a restart if you have an array with a bunch of duplicates for example. And you want to convert this into something like a set.
So something that has unique values, you can use NP, dot unique and that's going to give you all of the unique values from the array.
If you want to search for something you can actually use this dot where method, which is pretty cool, where it's going to give you all of the indices where a specific condition is true.
So if I say NP dot where array greater than five, let's run this and let's go down here. You can see that it gives us this result.
So this is array 56789. And these are all of the indices not values indices
where the value in the array is greater than five. And then you can see these are the individual values where that condition is true okay.
So pretty cool that you can use this dot where. And you can kind of perform the condition directly here.
All right. And then if I wanted to actually get all of those different values you can see that I can go array.
And then I put inside of here a list of indices. So this is something else you can do inside of numpy. Like I can go 1234 like that if I have a numpy array inside of the numpy array.
And that thing gives me all of the values associated with all of the indices inside of that numpy array, which is kind of what you're seeing right here.
Okay. Then we have stacking like I showed you before. We can do the vertical stacking, horizontal stacking, the column stacking.
And you can see a few examples of what that looks like okay. Now let's get into a few quick practical examples of when you would use numpy.
So you can see how these operations are actually useful. So the first example I have is image processing.
Practical Examples
So for example let's simulate a grayscale image or kind of like a 2D array with the values 0 to 255 which represents RGB values.
So you can see that I've created a simple ten by ten image, even though that's incredibly small. And I've said I want to have some random integers between 0 and 256.
So I get valid RGB values. So if I run the code here, you can see this is an example of what the image might look like.
This would just be a bunch of kind of random colored pixels. And if we have a look at the statistics of the image, you can see we have the mean standard deviation min max.
And I'm just rounding these off to do decimal places where appropriate. Now what I might want to do using dumpy is actually adjust the brightness of the image or the contrast.
Now in order to do that, I can simply add to the RGB value for every single pixel to make it, well, brighter.
So a function that I could use a numpy to do that is clip. Now, the way the clip works is it allows me to take a array
and to clip all of the values in that array between some range. So what I'm saying is, okay, I want to add 50 to this array.
Right. So that every single value here I want to add 50. But I want to make sure that all my values stay within zero and 255.
So when I do that it's going to clip the image and make it brighter, but not necessarily by 50
because some pixels may already be at their maximum brightness when I add 52. So if we look down here, you can see it says brightness increased.
Right. And shows me how much I increase the brightness. But okay then let's continue. Here we have another example right where same thing.
We clip the image. This time I'm multiplying the image. So I'm actually adding contrast rather than brightness.
And when I do that same thing I can clip it between zero 255. And you can see that it increases the contrast by a standard deviation of 77.
So just a quick example of some image manipulation using numpy when you're changing brightness and all of that kind of stuff
really behind the scenes, you're doing something by manipulating the pixels, which now you kind of understand if you were going to write it yourself in numpy.
Let's have another quick look, an example with some data analysis. Let's imagine we have some student test scores. So the values here are the test scores.
And each row represents one student right. If I want to print out all of the scores you can do that. Have a look at it. And then maybe I want to get the mean right.
The average the maximum score the the student with the best score. Right. All of that stuff. So I can start printing out some of those values.
So the average score per student. So this goes to each student and says okay. Student 187. Student 290.
Student 380, student 496, etc.. The best student average is 96, right?
Right here. And then the student with the best average, the index right is three. So if you use this argmax function this gives you the index.
Whereas if you use the max function it gives you the value. Both are particularly useful. Let's look at test statistics overall.
So the average score per test 87.6 88.4 89. So there was three tests.
Give me three averages. The hardest test zero easiest test two. And the way that I did that if you have a look here is I was doing this on the axis.
Right. So axis zero getting the test averages and then getting some results based on that. And then maybe I want to find all of the students who have scores that are greater than 90.
Okay, I can do that. NP dot UL scores greater than 90 axis equal to one.
And this is going to give me a boolean mask that has all of the students that essentially have this condition.
True. So if I scroll down here, you can see false false false true false indices three.
And then the scores of excellent students 95, 98 and 96. So I was able to there by using numpy really quickly do some data data analysis.
Sorry, this is significantly easier than if I had to write it manually in Python. And then lastly, I just created this quick kind of cheat sheet for you that you can reference
in this document in case you want to access it from the link in the description, which has a bunch of different functions in numpy that you can use, feel free to have a look at it.
Of course there are a lot more, but this video is just meant to cover the fundamentals. So that's it.
I'm going to wrap it up here. I hope that you found this video useful. If you did, make sure leave a like subscribe and I will see you in the next one.